Chance Thomas MP3 Notes
Game Developer magazine
November 2003

MP3 1
In developing original themes for Vivendi Universal Games' 
Lord of the Rings games, the music was first sketched out 
with MIDI sounds, then recorded and produced with live 
instruments and singers. This MP3 compares the MIDI and 
live versions of "The Triumphant Song of the Dwarves."

MP3 2
MIDI versions of each theme were sent to VUG management 
and all of the developers for feedback, and then recorded 
with individual acoustic instrumentalists and a live 
orchestra. This MP3 shows the MIDI approval version and 
final recording of "The Free Peoples of Middle-earth."

MP3 3
A principle idea behind VUG's franchise themes was to 
enable our entire group of games to speak the same 
musical language, while encouraging each individual 
game to speak the language in its own voice. This MP3 
showcases one example of that. It contains excerpts of 
music for the race of Hobbits dispersed throughout the
franchise, in the following order: LOTR franchise theme, 
The Hobbit, Treason of Isengard, and Middle-Earth Online.

MP3 4
The Dwarves' theme is illustrative of the fun different 
composers and development teams have with each theme.  
This MP3 starts with "The Mining Song of the Dwarves," 
one of the original LOTR franchise themes by Chance Thomas. 
Next is Lennie Moore's "Defense of the Iron Hills" from 
War of the Ring, followed by Brad Spear's score from Treason 
of Isengard. Finally, there's Middle-Earth Online's use of 
music cues, this one an instrumental remix from the Dwarves' 
original LOTR franchise theme. Each version speaks the same 
language, but with its own unique voice.

MP3 5
This MP3 showcases one of the main themes for the race of Men, 
in three excerpts. The first is from the LOTR franchise theme 
by Chance Thomas, the second is from Treason of Isengard by 
Brad Spear, and the third is from War of the Ring by Lennie 
Moore.

MP3 6
This MP3 includes excerpts of music for the race of Elves in 
two pairings. The first pairing highlights the Elves' main 
theme in a completely ethereal setting (LOTR franchise theme) 
followed by the same theme in a combat setting (Treason of 
Isengard). The second pairing offers a chance to hear one 
locational variant of the Elves' theme -Lothlórien, a principal 
Elven stronghold - in an exposition and variation from two 
games, Middle-Earth Online and War of the Ring.


